anyway i said you know you don't have to do this i've been at the state house for 10 hours today she could have come down there so uh so did they leave they stuck around all about well at least they were able they were nice enough to get out of the driveway stuck around a little bit
10 or 11, and then I went out to get a paper.
Rick, by the way, make sure you grab me at the New York Times.
Nick, where are you from?
I'm from Lowell originally.
Basvanis.
Up to Lowell.
My father is a Republican.
I think he supported one Democrat in his life, and you know who that is.
Michael Westukakis.
Do I know the family?
Do we know the family?
You may, I know.
Where did you grow up in Lowell?
I grew up in the non-Greek section of Lowell, but up on Christian Hill, over the bridge.
But my folks grew up in the Greek section.
My brother's an attorney in Lowell.
And tell me about yourself.
I'm a book editor of the Worcester Telegram, whatever I get.
Okay, okay.
I went to Bates.
Another Bates man.
Another Bates man and Bates woman.
When did you go to Bates?
I went to Bates.
I graduated in 65.
I went to graduate school at Penn State in journalism.
I think it was at Penn State.
Did you really?
Yeah, yeah.
I enjoyed it.
I spent a year in Washington at the Washington Journalism Center.
I did my thesis on the Bobby Baker case, which has interesting parallels with what's going on now.
And I did three years in the Navy as a public affairs officer on an aircraft carrier during Vietnam, which was fascinating.
Not a minesweeper.
No, they basically recruited me for public affairs.
But you're...
I'm a professional in this paper, man.
You're with Worcester?
I understand.
I've been with Worcester.
I went to work there at 71 with the idea that I'd stay for a year or two.
Kenny, where do you want to go?
93?
93.
Yeah, okay.
Straight school.
And I'm still there.
16 years.
16.
But I do a lot of freelance stuff.
I've been at the New York Times or the Washington Post.
Really?
Home is now outside of Worcester.
Got two little girls.
And two West Cambridge followers.
Now understand, sir, that this interview is for Greek Access Magazine.
I don't think these would be precisely the types of questions I would ask if I were doing a feature piece, but they do have specific areas I want to cover.
And I have scripted it.
the one good thing is that whatever you say will be published and verbatim so it's okay with your step okay in your announcement address and many times since one of your themes has been the stated hope quote that mike dukakis the son of greek immigrants can be elected president of the united states this is the first time to my knowledge that you have made a special point of stressing your ancestry in a political campaign i wonder what after 25 years of politics prompted you to take this no i've been i've been
Like every Massachusetts politician, I'm an ethnic.
I'm proud of it.
Never made any secret of that.
When I first ran for the legislature in Brookline, and I got into the legislature, everybody wanted to know in the legislature how a Greek American could get elected.
Brookline, fortunately.
I got great support from my fellow citizens.
This is a very ethnic state, as you know, and we're all very proud of our ethnicity.
As a matter of fact, straight through, Kenny, and under.
I did a, did the, Rick, did the, did the commercial I did in front of my folks' house, my dad's house in Lowell, didn't that win a prize in the 82 one?
Yeah, one of the, maybe the best commercial I've ever done.
It was in front of 106, there's a,
108 West 6th Street.
That's right.
Well, I grew up on 6th Street.
Yeah, on West 6th Street, right in front of the house where my dad and his parents lived when they came over here.
Really?
And it was a prize-winning commercial.
But it has become a specific feature of your campaign.
I've always, you know, we always talk and get around about our ethnic backgrounds in the state and always have.
I think one of the things that is important in the context of this presidential campaign is for people not only to know where you stand on a whole range of issues that a president would have to deal with, but who you are, where you come from, what you're made of, what goes into making up this person that's seeking the most important political office in the world.
And I sense more and more that around the country, people want to know.
They want to know what your values are, what your character is.
There's no way that one can predict in advance all of the things, all of the challenges, all of the problems that confront a president when he gets in there.
A lot of what's been going on with this around Congress scandal.
And it's particularly important people know what's inside here, you know?
Who we are.
So maybe mainly it's a point of sharpening and existing.
I mean, as you said, you focused on this.
Look, I've always had great support that we could be, you know.
Well, I guess maybe we've been very fortunate to.
terrific people who have been a part of my personal and political life for a long time, but I find great interest across the country in not so much our personal habits, but our personal background and what goes into making up this fellow that's standing in front of people in Iowa or Alabama or whatever and
You know, where are your roots at?
What are your values at?
So this would appeal to all ethnic groups, not just your own?
People generally.
I mean, whether an American is a first-generation American or a sixth-generation American, we are, with the exception of Native Americans, as a Native American pointed out to me in Sioux City the other day.
You know, we are all immigrants.
It's the American story, really, in many ways.
And there's just a great deal of interest around the country in one's background, in one's values, in what it is that provides the motivation, the beliefs, the strength that
that a position of political leadership has to have, and especially a person who's president.
But also, needless to say, the fact that my parents both came to this country and were fortunate to be able to take advantage of the educational opportunities that the country offers,
There's a lot to do with my own very strong commitment to public schools and quality education, and that's a very important issue.
When you have a son of a Greek immigrant who came here eight years after you arrived in this country, he was entering medical school.
His mother was the first Greek young woman ever to go beyond high school in Edward, Massachusetts.
I mean, no Greek young woman had ever gone to college.
Why did she go?
because of an elementary school principal, a guy named Stanley Gray, who was a down-east Yankee from Maine.
G-R-A-Y.
G-R-A-Y, yeah.
Who really became a second father to her, and my middle name, which is Stanley, which is not the traditional Greek, you know, you usually take your father's name here.
My grandfather, Michael, her mother's father, is the man I'm named for, but she wanted me to carry the name of that
I guess what many Greek Americans wonder is just how Greek you are, and you've alluded to quite a bit of that already.
And by that specifically, are you a member of any Greek church?
Were you married in the Greek church?
Are your children baptized?
Do you go into any Greek organization such as a HEPA?
I'm a member of the cathedral here in Gloucester.
I went to Sunday school there.
In fact, the archbishop was my parish priest when I was a child very close to my parents.
I'm a member of a HEPA and obviously
and spend a lot of time on Greek events and social events and so on.
Like many sons and daughters of Greek immigrants, I did not marry a Greek American.
And so we were not married in a Greek church.
We were married in a civil ceremony.
minister but neither kitties were my faith and we've tried very much to bring up our children with a good blend of both of our backgrounds and both of our cultures and religions my mother spoke creek to our kids who were home when they were old enough to
hear and understand that our son, John, is going to be married on the 16th of August, and he and his bride will be going to Greece for two weeks now.
And my parents made a point of taking each of the girls to Greece when they were 14 or 15.
I think it was kind of the same way my dad was still living when
Andrea went with him.
He had passed away by the time Carraway.
So they're very much aware, very proud of the Greek side of their lives, but they also had the opportunity to know and learn from the kiddies side as well.
We're very proud of them.
They're three very fine and ethical dissimilaring people.
And we're very proud of the heritage on both sides.
It is a national tradition that ethnic groups seek to move into the mainstream of American life through their leaders.
Indeed, the last man from Massachusetts to become President John F. Kennedy surrounded himself with key advisors who became known as the Irish Mafia.
And in New York, Mario Cuomo has named many people of Italian descent to high positions in the judiciary and in the cabinet.
in three terms now as governor of the commonwealth of massachusetts however you have yet to appoint a greek american to a cabinet position why is this aren't there any qualified greek americans in the state you feel you could qualify for high public service many of them unfortunately public service are very very successful in their own private lives but i not only have had many greek americans on my
executive office staff.
I have a very fine commissioner, John Palacos.
I appointed the first Greek American ever served in the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court.
A superb appointment of Paul Liacos.
He was here today.
I appointed Ted Backus to the Boston Municipal Court after having appointed him to
position of clerk, magistrate, and dead of Nick Service as the chairman of the National Association Council on the Arts and Humanities, and Arthur Clinton Sellers, the public health council, and there are many Greek Americans who are appointed to positions all over state government.
How many Greek Americans do we have in the government's staff in the first administration?
Nick was my personnel director, chairman of the Clusters, Sandal of my advance, Steve Polychronous, who is now the assistant director of the South Shore Federal Rail Project.
He was on my staff.
As a presidential candidate, you said that if elected, you would include in your cabinet a Hispanic, and that as Secretary of Agriculture, you would appoint a working farmer.
Are you also thinking about making a Greek American and naming a Greek American for your cabinet?
No, I expect it.
I expect it.
As president, first and foremost, I'm going to be looking for the very best people I can, but I have no doubt that, just as in my administrations, we have had a number of Greek Americans serving in many divisions.
I'm sure that will happen at the federal level as well.
I think, Governor, that one of the reasons why these questions are being asked is that, first of all, the Greeks are very proud of you.
And if the amount of campaign contributions you have received from the Greek-American community is an indication, they certainly do support you for the high office you seek.
But at the same time, some have a feeling that you come to them when you need their help, their support, and their money.
Why do you think they have been left with this impression?
Is that perception wrong?
What impression?
That you come to them primarily when you need them?
I don't know of anyone who had that.
I've heard a statement, but that would be your answer.
I don't know, Nick.
I've always had...
Very, very good support of the Greek community.
They've been very actively involved.
As a matter of fact, in this administration we've had a group of, oh, I don't know, 50, 60, 70 prominent Greek Americans.
They meet with us on a regular basis, so we have an opportunity to change ideas.
They've been actively involved in the administration.
Many of them are very close advisors, as well as being very good friends.
Now, obviously, one has to be the governor of all the people, and not just a representative of your own ethnic group.
We've had a fine relationship and it's been a tremendously important thing for me too because the Greek community of Massachusetts has done very well and the people in the community have achieved great success in the professions and business and teaching.
I'm very proud of that.
They're very proud of it.
You know, it's a very close car.
I would expect that to be exactly the same kind of relationship and the same kind of bond.
It's just about the elected president.
John Kennedy's election in 1960 laid to rest a long-held assertion that a Catholic could not be elected president.
As far as numbers go, Greek Americans with some 2 million people are less than 1% of the country's population.
Do you feel that as a Greek American and a Greek orthodoxy suffer from the same kind of stigma and face the same kind of obstacles?
No, I think it's an asshole.
And I say that not only because...
There's so many, many people in this country, whatever their generation, who respond to and admire what my parents and our parents and the parents of so many of us did.
Beyond that, the Greek community in this country has
has done well has made a very strong contribution a fine contribution in this country we have a reputation for being a community that works hard takes the education of our children very seriously tries to make a real contribution to our community i mean look at this state we have
what, 250,000 Greek Americans in Massachusetts?
And prior to Paul Saunders' decision to retire from the Senate for health reasons, we had a United States senator, a governor, and a congressman, all Greek Americans, as well as
At all other levels, too, many of the number of very few states, I don't know the state or country, that has ever come close to that.
And I think it's a reflection of the fact that in this state, what's 250,000?
That is six million.
That is fractional.
one important public offices.
I really believe it's an asset.
I speak all over the country.
I talk about who I am, what my background is, what my parents did, what they gave to me, as so many Greek immigrants did to their kids.
I think it's a real strength.
In financial reports recently made public, you were listed as having raised more money than any of the other aspirants for the nomination in either party.
Do you have any sense of how much of this support has come from the Greek-American community?
I can't tell you in exact percentage terms.
Rick might be able to get that for you, but certainly a substantial... I mean, obviously, my...
My initial financial and organizational base is Massachusetts, both Greek and non-Greek.
And I think about 70%.
Is that right, Rick?
Seventy-two-thirds of our contributions in the first quarter came from Massachusetts.
Now, some portion of that was from the Greek and American community here, but...
A lot of it wasn't.
On the other hand, there's no question that as I go across the country, the Greek community is just terrific.
And wherever I go, whether it's in Iowa, Birmingham, Detroit, Los Angeles, we've had a terrific response.
And a very enthusiastic response.
In fact, I was introduced the other day at a meeting of Orange County, California Democrats.
As you know, that is not exactly the Democratic hotline.
This segues into my next question, by the way.
We had 300 people once that showed up for breakfast in Orange County.
And I was introduced by the Greek-American mayor of Cyprus.
California, which is spelled C-Y-P-R-E-S-S, but you can imagine the fun we had, the two of us talking about what would happen.
The mayor of Cyprus and the governor of Massachusetts never got together.
So it's a great network of people.
You know, we're all very proud.
They've been a tremendous asset.
Greek Americans, particularly the affluent ones, tend to be conservative Republicans.
As a Democrat often identified as a liberal, which found that partisan politics get in the way of ethnic pride, do you sense that Greeks will support one of their own regardless of its politics?
Well, for one thing, the answer to that question is yes, but I think it goes beyond simply the fact that I happen to be a Greek man.
I'm not sure I understand what the definition of liberal and conservative is these days.
I've balanced nine budgets in a row.
I've cut taxes five times in the last four years and we're about to cut them again.
We've got a bunch of conservatives in the White House who couldn't balance a budget because they're like dependent on them.
if i heard my dad say once i heard him say a thousand times you know i mean that's something you grew up with particularly when your parents came from very humble origins and they had to struggle to make it
who the conservatives are, who the liberals are.
I don't know of a more conservative principle in this world than something called the rule of law, which incidentally we got from the ancient Greeks.
It's a very conservative notion.
The idea that we pass laws and we are all bound to obey them, and if we happen to disagree with one, we agree that we change it only in accordance with the Constitution.
And, you know, in that Athenian oath, the Greeks say we will revere and obey the law.
That's a very conservative principle.
We have an administration that doesn't understand the rule of law, doesn't believe in the rule of law, doesn't seem to care whether or not they break the law or they don't break the law.
You know, we've helped in Massachusetts, we've helped thousands and thousands of families on public assistance to get off of public assistance with
real training for meaningful jobs that can help these welfare families to transform their lives and support themselves and their children is that liberal or conservative i don't know i think it makes sense and what i'm sensing and finally let me say this there's nothing more basic about this country than the notion of economic opportunity of good jobs and good wages that's something i believe in very strongly i'm very proud of the fact that
this state is a symbol of economic opportunity with good jobs and good wages for people who've been very successful building an economic future in which our people have real economic opportunity i don't know whether that's a liberal conservative notion it's a very american notion
uh i guess if you were to say to me so what does that make you i'd say to you i'm an activist i'm somebody who believes that when you're elected in a position of political leadership you're elected to get things done to do things to take public resources combine them with private initiative go to regions that are hurting and declining and depressed whether it was a worcester 1975 or south eastern massachusetts 1983 and make things happen build coalitions
create that economic growth in those jobs.
And I think that's what the American people are looking for, including Greek Americans all over the country.
But your foreign policy positions in particular have been identified as liberal.
Do you see any need to moderate them?
How would you say that's not true?
Well, I don't know what that term means.
Well, Nicaragua... I believe that an American foreign policy could reflect American values and American principles.
I don't...
i don't understand what values on the line of current foreign policy what principles are involved there and here again one of the most important number of the principles that we have is something called the rule of law i'm all for i believe very strongly in the right of ships to pass and repass through international waters but how can you seriously support that concept of the persian gulf when you've been mining nicaraguan harbors
we're violating the rio treaty we're violating the charter of the organization of american states both of which explicitly prohibit what we're doing in nicaragua explicitly prohibiting what kind of a foreign policy is that
It's poverty and injustice and exploitation that sow the seeds of radical revolution, whether it's in Latin America or in countries around the world.
And unless we understand that and stop supporting the Batistas and the Somozas and the Marcosas as we have, at least until recently, we're going to find ourselves confronting radical revolutions
all over the third world.
My approach in Central America is to get involved with our democratic allies through the Contador process to bring that conflict to an end, to stop violating the law, and then to go to work with our friends and allies in Latin America to create a new alliance for progress and to work with them
in a very strong alliance for peace, for democracy, and for economic progress.
Look at the Persian Gulf.
There's a war that's been going on there between Iran and Iraq for seven years.
It's longer than World War II.
And the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, ourselves, the Russians, the British, the French, and the Chinese, the five nations who are under the turn of the UN who are supposed to stop conflict in this world have all been dealing arms to the combatants.
What kind of a policy is that?
What does that stand for?
Is that those American values?
And now we've put American flags in Kuwaiti tankers, and we're bumping into mines all over the Virgin Gulf.
Our job, our job as a strong, tough international leader is to stop that war, to get an embargo on foreign arms sales, to put a U.N.
peacekeeping force that necessary in there to end that conflict before it explodes all over the Middle East.
Here again, is that liberal?
Is it conservative?
I think it's a foreign policy that's consistent with the kinds of values and the kinds of principles that this country stands for.
And my major complaint with the current administration's foreign policy is that I don't
I don't have any idea what it is that underlines that foreign policy.
What values, what principles?
The President's debate with Walter Mondale in 1984 said that the only alternative to Marcos was a communist government in the Philippines.
I don't believe that.
I don't believe American people believe that.
And as it turns out, that was not the only alternative.
But if you approach
The world, with that view, that attitude, that kind of policy, we shouldn't be surprised if our credibility is destroyed.
If you tell your allies one thing, you do something else, you talk tough about terrorists, then you deal arms to the terrorists.
That's not a foreign policy.
When I'm foreign, I always use foreign policy in American people.
Among Greek Americans, there is widespread interest in Cyprus, which has been under Turkish domination now for 13 years.
You are good to articulate a position on that issue, or for that matter, on any other issues concerning Greece, such as the AG and then the Patriarchite.
I wonder if you would do so now.
As a matter of fact, I've been outspoken on the Cyprus issue ever since the Turkish invasion.
And in fact, I was outspoken upon the opponent of the Hunta, and because of two policies in the Eastern Mediterranean, he said so.
many many times and frankly i regret very much that the american government at the time that turkey invaded cyprus did nothing absolutely nothing to stop that invasion in fact we looked the other way and at that time the state department made no secret of its antagonism to the makaria to archbishop makarios
who was the one Cyprian leader who seemed to be able to maintain at least an uneasy peace and provide leadership so that the Greek and Turkish communities could live together in Cyprus.